Welcome to the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today.
A presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
And now your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
Keith Johnson.
And David Carson.
And this show will be on the writer Arthur C. Clarke.
Arthur C. Clarke was born in Great Britain, served in the Royal Air Force during World
War II, in which he was part of a radar reconnaissance team.
And then wrote in London for several years and is now residing in Sri Lanka.
He's probably one of the most well-known science fiction authors living today.
I would say that he's probably one of the most influential writers of the last 30 years.
Both in terms of money and in what he's contributed to the field, how he's, what he's given to other authors.
But if people had to mention a science fiction author, people who don't read science fiction
regularly, I think he would be one of the three or four that they would usually come
up with, especially because of his movie, 2001.
2001, A Space Odyssey, was a movie by Stanley Kubrick, written by Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke,
and was released in 1968.
The movie was hurled at as one of the greatest science fiction movies ever made.
I don't think there's any doubt of that.
The techniques used in the movie, the beauty of it, I think was almost incomparable.
I think people today would still call it probably the best one ever made.
I believe that, I've read reviewers who've said that it was the first science fiction movie that was,
it looked lived in.
The people were doing normal things.
They were using communications devices that probably people in the future will use.
Their way of life, the whole technique, the way it was arranged.
It made it very plausible.
Putting Howard Johnson's up in a normal space station kind of brought things back to home.
And didn't they have Bell Telephone on their video communication devices and so forth?
It was very realistic.
I think that was one of the biggest influences it had beyond the technology of it, the special effects and so forth.
And of course it had a tremendous influence on subsequent movies.
Partly in the fact that I think a lot of the science fiction movies, the really good ones that have been made since then,
would not have been considered possible if 2001 had not been such a great success.
And of course the content of some of these later movies has been influenced by 2001.
Many of the same themes and many of the same types of effects and settings came out of them that were started off in 2001.
I think probably it, of course it came from a short story, The Sentinel, which Clark had published back in the 50s.
And he expanded that.
He and Kubrick expanded that for the movie.
But I think the movie illustrates probably Clark's uniqueness as a science fiction author in that there is both a great deal of hard science in it.
Technology and believable theory and so forth.
And on the other hand there's also a mysticism.
The science is blended with a mystical vision of man's destiny, of evolution, of man being guided by powers far beyond his control and knowledge.
And that kind of mysticism in science is a very strange blend in a science fiction author.
And I think Clark, especially the ending of the movie, I think it's probably the most typical Clark scene that I can think of where you have the star child, the fetus being born.
I think symbolically meaning the beginning of a new way of life for people.
They've gone beyond, just as the ape leaped into the man.
Man is now going to leap into something else.
The star child would symbolize that.
But in between that ending and the beginning, you have a very scientific movie with a lot of hardware and a lot of believable devices and so forth.
Yes, it starts out on a mystical level back in prehistoric time, back before man had gained intelligence.
And then after the ape man's encounter with the alien artifact, the movie jumps forward several thousand years into, I would say, our near future.
And several events transpire on a shuttlecraft between the earth and the moon.
And then once again on the moon, when man once again encounters another alien artifact.
And then they follow the signal out to Jupiter and then encounter a third artifact.
And then the movie slips back into the mystical mode where the man travels through all these, I guess, different dimensionalities.
Then makes another huge jump in his evolutionary status up into a higher plane of being which was represented by the star child.
Some people have puzzled at that ending.
They left, I've talked to some viewers who left the movie theater with a question, you know, what did that mean, what was happening?
But I'm not sure that's of importance.
I think the feeling you get at the end of it, there's a great sense of optimism, a feeling of something new that's going to happen, some tremendous breakthrough.
And I think that's all that Clark intended, just the feeling.
You don't have to explain that logically, what happened?
That, and also I believe that he wanted them to wonder what was happening, or at least he and our Kubrick did.
They didn't want to explain in detail what was going on.
They wanted the people to draw their own conclusion.
And I think also the thing that impressed me too about the movie that's typically Clark is a man being guided by some power.
Towards some goal, there's a purpose to everything that's happening.
And that man has a purpose to his life, something he's moving toward.
He's being guided in that direction.
Clark of course has written many other things besides science fiction.
In fact, I think he got his start, or at least has written very prolifically, many science essays in a large variety of different areas.
He's written on communication satellites.
He wrote of course the famous paper that first described this possibility.
But he's also written on the development of television, worldwide television, the development of the human brain, new concepts in learning, new ways of farming the sea.
And the list goes on and on.
And these are all very interesting things to read.
They're written for the layman.
They're not scientific papers in most cases and are worth reading.
Some of them have been quite influential, haven't they? Particularly the one on communication satellites.
Yes, I believe so.
That first one called extraterrestrial relays actually went into some of the science involved in communication satellite concept.
How much power would be necessary, how the satellites would be powered, where you would place them in orbit and so forth.
I don't believe that first essay actually talked about the geosynchronous satellite concept that we now accept.
I think he missed the boat on that one, which is understandable.
This was what, back in the early 40s.
But a lot of the analysis he did has shown to be valid in today's world.
And he's one of the first ones who wrote about that.
That puts he in a league with very few other science fiction authors who have written on both the science fiction and science fact.
He and Isaac Asimov are the only ones that come to mind.
Well, I can think of a few minor authors, say Fred Hoyle, who's an astronomer and has written a few novels.
And Jerry Pranell.
And Hal Clemman, I guess he's a science teacher. I'm not sure we'd call him a practicing scientist.
Clark, I think, would be one of the very few.
It's a rare case where you have a man competent in science who is also a very fine author.
The
Clark, of course, uses the science that he is a master of in many of his science fiction writings, too.
And one of the best examples of this is a recent novel called Fountains of Paradise.
The basic concept or the setting behind the novel is the development of a new type of space station, one which is actually anchored to the earth.
Now, this sounds a little bit impossible or a little difficult anyway for someone who's not studied the problem.
But it turns out it may be possible in the near future to build a tower which stretches out into space, something like 50,000 miles, something like that,
but anchored to the earth.
And on the side of the tower or inside the tower, you could put some kind of traveling vehicle, an elevator, that would take you up to space and up to the level of the satellites that we have now.
It would be a much cheaper way to get there.
It would take you a little bit longer, but maybe three or four days to get to orbit instead of just 15 or 20 minutes.
But it would be a much cheaper way to go.
Of course, it requires a type of structural material about five times or ten times stronger than what we have right now, but give the scientists time and they're working on it in their laboratories.
They will probably eventually put it together.
In Fountains of Paradise, Clark makes some interesting comparisons or contrasts between an ancient ruler of what is actually Ceylon or Sri Lanka, although the country is actually fictionalized to a certain extent.
The ruler is trying to build for himself a lasting monument, and this monument is a very beautiful set of paintings around the inside of a valley, I believe.
And Clark contrasts this with the building of the space tower and the mastermind, the person behind the building of the tower.
The plot is fairly simple. Something goes wrong in the tower and the mastermind, the hero, goes up and fixes it.
But the view of the tower itself, how it's going to be put together, is rather interesting and is one that actually would work if we can find the structural materials necessary strong enough to actually build this thing.
Would there be any sway to that or would it be absolutely fixed? Would it curve in and out with storms or winds or would it be absolutely immobile?
It actually would curve back and forth a little bit. In fact, the Earth's gravitational field is not constant everywhere.
There are all sorts of little anomalies in it, little areas of change. And there are probably, as I understand it, an analysis shows that there are areas on the Earth's surface which are better for anchoring this thing down than other areas, more stable areas, gravitationally.
And Sri Lanka, or the country that Clark mentioned in the novel, turns out to be one of the few accessible areas on the equator where this can be done.
So it becomes a very important part of the world. It's not an easy thing to do. You could build this tower in orbit and then fly the end of it down to the Earth and anchor it down there.
It's certainly going to be a monumental engineering task.
I think the science of the book was impressive and I would label it as one of his hard science novels.
But on the other hand, there was a, well, not a strange but to me an unexpected prologue or ending to the book. It skips forward 1500 years into the future.
So this tower has been in existence for 1500 years and working.
And I think there was also a ring, sort of a ring space station around the Earth at that time that the tower went to.
But that last little part is from the point of view of an alien, a very alien creature who comes to the Earth.
They've made contact with humanity years before and he's talking to the children that he's in a party with children and they're admiring the tower.
And marveling at the fact that it's lasted so long, it's been so successful.
And the alien, you're sort of involved in his thought processes and he expresses admiration both for human beings and for the, what he calls the potential, the things that these children are going to become.
Their mentality is increasing.
It's sort of the thing that Clark does at the ending of many of his books, a destiny statement about where mankind is going.
Yes, mankind is going to undergo a big quantum jump and become something different.
Right, so even in a hard science book, Clark could not quite get away from that large perspective on mankind's goals and changes.
Another example of one of Clark's hard science books is Rendezvous with Rama.
This is a novel of discovery and exploration of an incredibly large alien spacecraft traveling through our solar system.
It's detected on the edge of our solar system and Earth sends up an exploratory team to investigate and they find a huge cylindrical spacecraft
heading in the direction of our sun and they eventually gain access to it and go inside and find it's really a gigantic city.
And they set up a base and begin exploration of this spacecraft and they never meet any of the aliens or any alien intelligent alien lifeform.
I should preface that they do meet alien lifeforms.
Although they are never able to quite describe or discover what they are, they are maintenance people, personnel.
They go about maintaining the space station although when they accidentally kill one of them, they find out that it's not actually a living organism.
It's a constructed organism even though it's made out of organic material.
They eventually, the spacecraft is divided into two halves separated by a river that runs around the inside of the cylinder.
They cross this river by use of a very elaborate hang glider which they motorized hang glider which they are able to,
in the center of the cylinder where there is zero gravity they are able to hang glide across this huge river and explore the far side.
They never really discover the purpose of why the spacecraft is traveling through our solar system or who created it or what its ultimate destination is.
They eventually have to leave the spacecraft before it enters the photosphere of the sun and starts to burn up but before it does,
it seems to generate some sort of force field which protects it from the sun's violent radiation and it whoops around the sun in a very tight orbit
and heads out of our solar system at an incredible rate of speed.
They explorers are set about setting up some sort of detection system because they found out that all the aliens, artifacts,
and all their constructs inside the spacecraft were in threes so they are expecting at least two more of these spacecrafts to come through our solar system.
So at the end of the book they are sitting there waiting on the second one to come by.
Of course I think we would classify this as a particular form of first contact novel, a particular form in that you never meet the aliens
but on the other hand you have proof that here is an alien culture which is far superior to our own.
We don't seem to learn much from it but the people, the humans who experience this are in awe at the power, they wonder at the purpose of it.
I think what Clark does in the novel also is classify the various reactions that people have.
For instance at this time I think it's a few hundred years into the future and man is spread partially
through the solar system to some of the habitable planets and moons of the solar system.
In one group of humans on Hermes which is Mercury, their reaction to this is total fear, xenophobia.
It's alien, it must be hostile, let's destroy it.
So they send an armed nuclear device to destroy it while the exploratory party from Earth is exploring.
And of course the good guys, the protagonist is able to disarm the device before it does any harm.
Other people simply are, their reaction is simply one of awe, curiosity, where did these people come from?
Are there going to be more ships? What can we learn from it?
But it is the first contact story of a particular kind and I think is very effective as such.
Of course it won the two major science fiction writing awards, the Nebula and the Hugo Awards in addition to others.
One of the things that impressed me about it was the concept of genetic engineering.
We talk about biological engineering now in the sense of maybe in a few years we'll be able to control the color of our baby's eyes
by changing gene structures before he's born, this sort of thing.
But Clark has taken this concept and gone and run with it and carried it much further than most of us would.
If you can imagine, he thinks about this in the novel.
The people who built the novel, the alien creatures that built the novel may actually be on board somewhere in the form of DNA.
They don't have bodies, their genetic information has been stored.
And when it becomes necessary or convenient for them to be reconstituted, the spacecraft or the space station will do it automatically.
This is a very alien concept to us of course, to have our bodies wiped out or have ourselves, our basic identities reduced down to something in the order of DNA.
But it shows what one of the things that Clark is capable of doing.
He'll take any concept he comes across and many that he indents himself and takes it as far as he possibly can and gets some very striking results out of it.
I enjoyed that.
I think the ending is particularly interesting too, as I would say all of Clark's work.
The endings are very upbeat, but the scene where this huge ship, the humans are not sure what's going to happen.
It's heading toward the sun.
They are almost certain it's going to be destroyed in the sun because the gravitation will pull and so forth.
This huge ship approaches the sun and as they are far away from it, watching it, it exerts tremendous power and sort of sucks energy out of the sun,
wraps itself in a cocoon from the sun's energy in preparation to launching itself off further in the direction it's going.
But there's a beauty to that in the sense of an indifference to humanity.
All we can do is sit and watch with awe at the power, wonder at the purpose of this huge device.
That ending almost becomes mystical even though this is definitely a hard science book,
but you get a tremendous sense of awe, something beyond human potential and capabilities which is occurring.
Would you say that Clark in many of his novels has constructed almost a scientific religion,
or he has this kind of feeling behind a lot of his works?
Yes, some commentators have said that he has a vision of mankind's destiny, a purpose, a goal.
A man is evolving towards something beyond himself, perhaps pure mentality, pure spirituality.
But I think that can be seen in a great deal of his works.
Another side of Clark, and I think it's going to be the one that he's most remembered for,
is what some authors or commentators call his mystical side.
The first major novel that he wrote in this mode was written in 1953 and entitled Against the Fall of Night.
But he changed the title in 1956 and called it The City and the Stars,
and some people are confused by that change of title, but the title that goes by now is The City and the Stars.
The scene is at least a billion years into the future, which is a little uncharacteristic for Clark.
This is way far into the future.
And mankind has changed drastically.
Earth is almost totally a desert.
There are no oceans, salt flats, and dust.
It's about all that is left on the earth.
There is one great city called the Aspar, with a few million people in it, but it's the only city left.
It's a doned city, and the people within it cannot experience the outside world.
They are immortal.
They're far enough in the future where they have conquered death.
They live forever.
There's no population growth.
They're very little.
Machines do everything for them.
These machines have no moving parts.
They will never wear out.
They would be called perpetual motion machines.
The people don't understand the machines, but they don't have to because the machines will never break down.
There is no sickness, no want.
You know, the people lack for nothing.
It's a true utopia.
The one flaw that they have is stagnation.
They have a terrible fear of ever trying to get outside of the dome of the Aspar, the city.
They are very insular.
They have no curiosity.
The protagonist in the novel is named Alvin.
He's a young man.
I think we would call him a teenager, even though he's 7,000 years old.
He's the last person born in this city.
And even though he has the age of 7,000 years, he is still considered a youth or a boy to the people of that city.
He's different.
He's inquisitive.
He's curious.
He wants to leave the city and find out what's outside.
He does this.
He finds a way out of the city, which was quite difficult in itself, and he makes his way to another community of humans,
the only other community of humans on the earth, and it's called LIS.
It's the exact opposite of the Aspar.
The people have no technology.
They are not immortal.
They do have curiosity and drive left to them, which the people of the Aspar did not.
These people knew the existence of the Aspar, but they want nothing to do with the inhabitants of that city.
Along with one of the people of LIS, Alvin discovers an old man who was dying, and in the man's possession are three robots.
Before the man dies, he gives one of the robots to Alvin and says that these robots belong to a person called the master,
who served the great ones.
The great ones have now left, and the old man is awaiting them.
According to him, they'll be back someday.
With the robot, which has incredible powers, Alvin finds a ship which has been left by the master.
He gets into the ship and lets it go where it will, and it travels much faster than the speed of light,
and finally, after a journey of only a few hours, arrives at the center of the galaxy, where Alvin sees something that is called the Seven Suns.
These are stars which have been constructed.
They are artificial constructions with a huge planet among them.
Well, there are many planets, but on one of the planets, he finds what must have been the hub of the greatest galactic culture of all time.
Tremendous achievements in engineering cities which are now deserted.
There's nothing left there. It's totally empty.
Before Alvin leaves, a creature called Vanamond comes.
Vanamond is what we would call a supermind.
Vanamond has been created by the so-called great ones.
Alvin still doesn't know who these great ones were, but Vanamond, even though he's a supermind,
is sort of childlike in his innocence.
He accompanies Alvin back to Earth where he tells all he knows about mankind's past history.
The story that Vanamond tells fills in the knowledge that Alvin needs to recover his past, or the past of the human race.
Briefly, it's this. Millions of years into the past, man had split.
One group had gone out into the galaxy, into the universe, achieved a great culture,
united with other races, and had achieved a level of pure mentality.
They could, their minds, mind over matter, to put it simply, their minds could control matter.
They formed what I think would be called almost an overmind in childhoods' end.
One group of, okay, one group of humans did not become part of this group.
They were the other half of this split.
They were afraid of going yet into the galaxy.
They stayed on Earth. They built domed cities, and they became very fearful and insular.
Now the whole universe seems to be empty, because the great ones, by the way,
turn out to be this other half of the human race, the ones who would achieve this high level.
They had detected a far superior civilization outside the confines of the universe.
Clark says, beyond the curve of the cosmos, they had detected signals of a civilization even more advanced than they were.
They left. They left Van-Amon. They created Van-Amon as sort of the supermind of their existence
that contained all of their past, their memories, and so forth.
And they left to follow this other race, see if they could detect it.
The master was simply one of the great ones.
He left the ship. He left the robots.
Probably, we're not sure of this, but probably hoping that somebody would find the robots in the ship someday.
And anyhow, Alvin sends the ship off.
It's totally automatic. It has tremendous power.
Sends the ship off to find the great ones, whatever humanity has become, you know, beyond the confines of this universe, whatever they become.
The ship will find them, will signal to them that their cousins, their brothers, are now interested in re-establishing contact and so forth.
And the ending of the book is, again, typically Clark.
You have a picture of the ship going off into the unknown, establishing contact with a race, whatever humans have become,
and this race presumably will lift their cousins or their brothers, the ones left on Earth, lift them out of their fear,
their stagnation, and they can go on to become the new thing, the thing that mankind is destined to become that Clark seems to eternally visualize.
Author C. Clark is one of the world's best known and most respected science fiction authors.
Many of his works will have a lasting impression in science fiction literature and in literature in general.
And in the years to come, he will probably be remembered with such greats as H.G. Wells, Jules Verne.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, in conjunction with Odessa College and K.O.C.V.F.M.
The Science Fiction Radio Show